% When is cophylogeny evidence of coevolution?
% Timoth√©e Poisot
% Apr. 2013

**Conceptual advances in the field of antagonistic coevolution resulted in an
increased understanding of how hosts and parasites have a reciprocal impact on
their ecology and evolution. While it is known that coevolution can trigger
diversification in both the host and its parasite, it is not clear under which
set of conditions coevolution will result in mirorring phylogenies. By
reviewing the literature related to host-parasite diversification and
antagonistic coevolution, I highlight that coevolution is neither necessary
nor sufficient in order to establish a co-phylogenetic pattern. The
consequences of this fact for the interpretation of the presence or absence of
a co-phylogenetic pattern are discussed.**

# Introduction

Since the idea of coevolution as a relevant concept for the study of
evolutionary ecology of communities was introduced by
@ehrlich_butterflies_1964, there has been a vast literature around this
concept. The first formal definition of coevolution can be attributed to
@janzen_when_1980: coevolution is a change of traits in a first population as
a response to the trait value of a second population, *followed by* a change
of trait in the second population in response to the new trait value in the
first [different modalities of trait dynamics have been described since then,
@gandon_host-parasite_2008]. Much emphasis is put on the fact that the
existence of an interaction *is not* indicative that the species have
coevolved (it can reflect a recent host acquisition, for example). Based on
this, Janzen recommends a lot of cautiousness when using the word
*coevolution*, and it is worth asking if more than 45 years later, we are
being cautious enough.

It is a widely appreciated fact that some symbiontic or interacting systems
display a co-phylogenetic pattern. In these situation, (1) the phylogeny of
one group of species mirrors the phylogeny of the other group, and (2) species
from one group tend to interact with species occupying a position similar to
their own on the opposite tree [@fahrenholz_ectoparasiten_1913]. Although
exemples of pairs of trees conforming exactly to this rule are scarce, a
significant cophylogenetic structure was reported for a variety of systems
[some of which are revied by @nieberding_use_2010], including monogeneans
parasites of Mediterranean sparids [@desdevises_coevolution_2002] and African
cichlids [@mendlova_monogeneans_2012], aphids and their bacteria
[@jousselin_fine-scale_2009], algae and prasinoviridae
[@clerissi_prasinoviruses_2012], and mimetic heliconid butterflies
[@hoyal_cuthill_phylogenetic_2012]. In other instances, phylogenetic analysis
failed to demonstrate congruence of the two trees, such as in millipedes and
mites [@swafford_failure_2010]. The accumulating evidences that species
interactions (notably antagonistic ones, such as hosts-parasites) often
resulted in partners sharing a phylogenetic structure was instrumental in
developing the notion of *tangled trees* [@Page1994;@Page2003]. It posits that
because hosts and parasites species are engaged in intimate interactions with
one another, and often have a reciprocal effect on one another fitnesses, we
expect that their evolutionary history will show some degree of similarity. A
the macro-evolutionary scale, this can result in the host phylogeny and the
parasite phylogeny looking alike. In a significant number of these studies,
the significance of the cophylogenetic pattern is equated to the likelihood
that the host-symbiont system considered is coevolved. Indeed, this trend is
clear when looking at the bibliometry (Fig. **xx**).

Historically, looking for correspondences in the phylogenetic history of hosts
and parasites to infer a coevolutionary history stems from two central ideas:

1. Both partners (the parasite and its host) represent a strong selective
force for one another, given that their interaction has important consequences
for their fitness and life-traits [@crofton_quantitative_1971]. They should
hence influence each other evolutionary histories, to the point where
evolutionary events in one of the partners (the host or the parasite) should
trigger an evolutionary event in the other one.

2. One of the species is using the other as its environment, and as such, we
should expect it to track this environment in the phylogenetic space, much in
the same way that plants and animals track their environmental niche in space.
A consequence of this would be that the phylogenetic tree of the exploiting
species will mimic its of the exploited species, if only because host
speciation will result in "allopatric" speciation in the parasite
[@le_gac_what_2004].

The current theoretical framework surrounding the notion of coevolution
[@thompson_coevolutionary_1994; @thompson_geographic_2005] relies on
correlation between coevolved traits [@nuismer_when_2010], and correlations
between traits values and fitness [@gomulkiewicz_hot_2000;
@gomulkiewicz_dos_2007], which results in reciprocal selection. Although it
makes predictions on the diversification of coevolving lineages
[@yoder_when_2010], it is an inherently micro-evolutionary phenomenon. Yet,
@thompson_raw_1999 states that coevolution can bridge the gap between micro
and macro-evolutionary scales, specifically by focusing on the relationships
between traits values and diversification patterns. Phylogenetic tracking
(parasites speciate in response to host speciation) can happen without
reciprocal selection (several examples are given in the second part). On the
contrary, novel hosts with trait values allowing them to escape their
parasites should be advantaged. In this situation, there will be no co-
diversification, and we predict a loss of the phylogenetic similarity between
hosts and parasites. In this perspective, there are a large number of
situations in which (i) co-phylogenetic structure can happen without
coevolutionary dynamics (*i.e.* no reciprocal selection), and (ii) reciprocal
selection will result in the loss of the co-phylogenetic structure.

More recently, the interactions between coevolutionary processes and
phylogenetic structre (including trait conservatism and the phylogenetic
determinism of species interactions) received an increased amount of attention
in the emerging field of community phylogenetics. @cavender-bares_merging_2009
showed that the phylogenetic structure of victims species can be significantly
altered by enemies. Specifically, two factors are important in determining the
shape of the current victim phylogenetic structure: the conservation (or
convergence) of defenses, and the generality of enemies. Combination of these
two factors can alter both the structure of the victim phylogeny, and the
extent to which (defense) traits are conserved through it.
@mouquet_ecophylogenetics_2012 emphasized that phylogenetic information is
critical to understand the current structure of interaction networks, as long
as we are able to understand (i) the current structure and evolutionary
history of traits, and (ii) how this trait structure relates to species
interaction.

With these elements in hand, it appears that understanding the relationship
between the co-evolutionary process and the phylogenetic structure of host-
parasite assemblages is an important research perspective. The literature
mentioned in this introduction suggest that (i) a co-phylogenetic structure
can emerge without co-evolutionary dynamics, and (ii) coevolutionary dyanmics
can impede the establishment of a co-phylogenetic structure. In this
contribution, I review empirical and theoretical studies to further clarify
the interactions between the two. I challenge the idea that detecting a co-
phylogenetic structure allows concluding that coevolution is occuring. I do so
by showing that coevolution is neither necessary (co-phylogenetic structure
can emerge outside of coevolving interactions), nor sufficient (coevolution
can lead to non-matching phylogenies), to establish a cophylogenetic pattern.
I briefly discuss the consequences of these facts for the methodology on co-
phylogenies. Finally, I explore the role of several coevolutionary scenarios
in preventing the establishment of a co-phylogenetic structure, and show that
they have predictable consequences on the observed co-phylogeny. I conclude by
recommending that we do away with the idea that co-phylogeny implies
coevolution (and that conversely, the lack of a co-phylogeny implies no co-
evolution), as it can severely undermine our ability to understand the
evolution of defense mechanisms in coevolved interactions.

# Coevolution is neither necessary nor sufficient

In this section, I propose that cospeciation and coevolution should be
considered as two distinct processes. One (cospeciation) can arise as a
consequence of the other, but neither is coevolution necessary, nor
sufficient, in triggering the establishment of a co-phylogenetic pattern. I
illustrate these aspects through various empirical examples. In the first
part, I review results form phylogeographic analyses, showing that the
phylogeographic history of the host can be a major driver of the parasite
phylogenetic structure. This shows that co-phylogeny can emerge even when
there is no evolutionary interaction between the host and the parasite. In the
second part, I show that even in the presence of coevolution, other factors
can blur the co-phylogenetic pattern. Taken together, these elements strongly
indicate that equating the presence of a co-phylogenetic pattern to
coevolutionary history (or the other way around) is profoundly misleading.

## Coevolution is not necessary: cospeciation without coevolution

The importance of spatial processes in the establishment of a co-phylogenetic
pattern has been recognized for a long time. Phylogenetic reconstruction of
amphibians and their parasites from the genus *Polystoma*
[@bentz_historical_2006] established that co-speciation events were for a vast
majority well explained by the acquisition of new host habitats at a large
(continental) biogeographic scale. A similar situation was reported in a
variety of other systems. The highly significant cophylogenetic structure of
toucans and chewing lices is explained by biogeographic events
[@weckstein_biogeography_2004]. @peterson_cophylogeny_2010 show that fungal
parasites of the southern beech from the genus *Cyttaria* show some degree of
cophylenetic structure with their host, despite having a wide host range.
However, most of the clear co-divergence events can be attributed to
biogeographic events, most notably the breakup of Gondwana. In these examples,
the host and parasite phylogeny display a good level of congruence, but the
mechanism through which this congruence emerges has nothing to do with the
coevolutionary process.

Looking into more details into the biology of these systems, it is possible to
better understand the properties of host-parasites associations having or not
a cophylogenetic structure. Dispersal-limited parasites with a narrow host-
range should be expected to display a better phylogenetic congruence with
their hosts. Generalists parasites, or those able to disperse over long
distances, should have a distinct phylogeny from their hosts. This is
particularly striking in the analyses of @jackson_cophylogenetic_2004: viruses
with (mostly) vertical transmission are more phylogenetically congruent with
their hosts than are viruses with (mostly) horizontal transmission. It must
also be noted that higher dispersal can allow the evolution of a wider host
range, as a more heterogeneous population of hosts is encountered
[@poisot_conceptual_2011], which will (as illustrated later on) decrease the
likelihood that a cophylogenetic signal is detected.

In the most extreme case, a perfect co-phylogenetic pattern is expected when
host speciation events are completely independent of the parasites. Each time
two host populations speciate because of distance separation, if parasite
dispersal is low, a parasite speciation event is expected to occur. Note that
this makes no assumption about trait matching between the host and the
parasite, and can occur even if the parasite has almost no fitness effect on
its host. In this case, concluding that the perfect co-phylogenetic pattern
indicates coevolution is deeply misleading. Note that this can also arise in
environments wherein the reciprocal selection is weak (the so-called
"coevolutionary cold-spots"); in these environments, there is no correlation
between traits values and fitness, and even though the two species can co-
evolve, no coevolutionary dynamics is established (*i.e.* the direction of
trait change of one species with regard to the other species trait value
appears random). In these environments, parasites can co-speciate with their
hosts, but coevolution is not the mechanism driving the co-speciation.

## Coevolution is not sufficient: coevolving without cospeciating

For coevolution to result in a co-phylogenetic pattern, a number of conditions
must be met. First, the pathogen must be able to trigger a speciation in its
host. Second, the pathogen population must divide on the two incipient host
populations, and undergo a speciation event. These two criteria allow the
emergence of a co-phylogenetic structure. Third, there should be limited
potential for either intra-host diversification, host acquisition (range
expansion), or host switch. This ensures that the co-phylogenetic structure is
maintained. There are documented examples of potentially coevolving systems
showing no phylogenetic congruence [for a list, see @johnson_untangling_2004].
In this section, I review theoretical and empirical studies highlighting the
mechanisms through which coevolving systems can fail to show a co-phylogenetic
pattern.

@yoder_when_2010 models a variety of ecological situations (mutualism,
parasitim, and different underlying trait matching scenarios) to find out when
coevolution should lead to diversification. One of their most striking results
is that, when the interaction relies on increasingly stringent trait matching,
coevolution leads to a bimodal distribution of host traits, but to a unimodal
distribution of parasite traits, although with a great variance. In other
words, the parasite selection pressure triggers the emergence of two host
quasi-species, but the parasite itself do not speciate, it only increases its
phenotypic variance. @weitz_coevolutionary_2005 reported similar results in a
model of coevolutionary arm-races in a microbial system. Both these studies
agree on the fact that many coevolutionary interactions may not promote
diversification.

Single traits models as used by @yoder_when_2010 and
@weitz_coevolutionary_2005 are more conservative in their estimates of when
speciation can occur. However, @gilman_coevolution_2012 reached similar
conclusions using a more realistic multidimensional trait space. As the number
of traits (hence the complexity of the underlying physiological, behavioral,
etc, processes involved in attack/defense) increased, the chance of the victim
escaping its enemy became higher. From a mechanistic point of view, this
result makes sense if defending against an enemy is easier than attacking a
victim, or if the evolution of defense mechanisms is less constrained than the
evolution of attack mechanisms. For example, a host can avoid a parasite
through several non-mutually exclusive ways: behavioral adjustment, specific
adaptations, or interactions with protective symbiont. For example, plants
defend themselves against herbivores through biomechanics means
[@whitney_biomechanics_2013], rendering them unpalatable, but also evolved
specific signaling pathways to attract parasitoids to defend themselves
[@wei_plants_2007].

Finally, recent empirical findings on bacteria-phage systems, specifically the
system formed by *Pseudomonas fluorescens* and its phage, can shed some light
on the fact that co-diversification is seldom the rule in coevolving systems.
@poullain_evolution_2008 investigated the evolution of host range of
bacteriophages on bacterial hosts in evolving (the host do not evolve) and
coevolving (both the host and the parasite evolve) interactions. Coevolution
resulted in a higher generalism of phage, with a clear nested pattern of
interactions. This same nested pattern was reported for field isolates of this
[@poisot_structure_2013] and other [@koskella_understanding_2013] systems.
These systems are well known for displaying coevolutionary dynamics in their
natural habitats [@gomez_bacteria-phage_2011;@koskella_local_2011].

# The impact of coevolution on the co-phylogenetic structure

As mentioned in the introduction, coevolution requires correlations between
the traits of one partner and both its fitness and the fitness of the other
partner, though correlation itself do not necessarily result in coevolution
[@nuismer_when_2010]. Co-speciation, which can be revealed by the existence of
a co-phylogenetic pattern, emerges when an evolutionary event (*i.e.*
speciation) in one partner results in speciation in the other partner. The
initial speciation even can be induced spatial constraints, niche
differentiation, or can be triggered by the interaction with the parasite. In
the previous part, I reviewed studies showing that (i) a co-phylogenetic
structure can emerge in  the absence of coevolution, and (ii) coevolutionary
dynamics are not necessarily expected to result in a co-phylogenetic pattern.
In this part, I will review several events likely to happen during host-
parasite coevolution, and how they will blur the co-phylogenetic pattern.
Specifically, I show that these events have predictable consequences on the
phylogenetic structure of hosts and parasites, and the distribution of
interactions in the phylogeny. Accounting for these events will likely help
refine our understanding of the interactions between coevolutionary dynamics
and the emergence of a co-phylogenetic structure.

The emergence of perfectly matching phylogenies requires that each host
speciation event is matched by a parasite speciation event (and reciprocally),
while no other evolutionary events happen [@Page1994]. Any deviation from this
situation will result in a decrease of the matching between the host and
parasite phylogenies. Broadly speaking, one can describe four categories of
evolutionary events decreasing the matching between phylogenies: intra-host
speciation (independent speciation of the parasite), failure to cospeciate
(independent speciation of the host, with one incipient species non infected
by the parasite), host acquisition and host switch, and finally parasite
extinction. In this part, I show how coevolution can, and under some
circumstances, is expected to, result in the four previously described events,
thus preventing the establishment of a cophylogenetic structure.

## Coevolution can trigger intra-host speciation

quite easy

adaptive dynamics

poullain

## Coevolution can trigger host-switch

A major aspect of co-phylogenetic structure is that hosts and parasites should
keep a one-to-one association, *i.e.* a parasite should interact with an host
matching its position on the other tree. Yet, there is accumulating evidence
that host-switch (*i.e.* the use of a novel host over time), and more broadly
host rang expansion (*i.e.* the ability to infect a novel, additional host)
are likely outcomes of the coevolutionary process. When host-switch events are
accounted for by co-phylogeny reconstruction software, it is most often under
the form of the spontaneous acquisition of a new host. @hall_bacteria-
phage_2010 present experimental results seriously challenging of this view.
Over long-term coevolution, parasites should evolve toward a greater
generalism. Under this perspective, the spontaneous acquisition of a novel
host is less likely than the progressive broadening of the host range. This
broadening is made possible by (i) a shift in the selection regime over time,
favoring fluctuating dynamics (in which generalism is basically cost-free)
instead of arm races [@hall_host-parasite_2011], and by (ii)  the fact that
compensatory mutations accumulate over time, reducing the pleiotropic costs of
the progressive broadening of the host range [@scanlan_genetic_2011].

With regard to these results, the fact that generalist pathogens have a higher
phenotypic and genetic variability makes more (evolutionary) sense.
@kaci_chaouch_host_2008 report that within the genus *Lamellodiscus*,
generalist species have more variability than specialist species both in terms
of morphology and genetics. A frequently proposed hypothesis is that
generalists parasites are more variable to accomodate the heterogeneity of
their different hosts [@desdevises_evolution_2002]. However, all ecological
variables being equal, this can also reflect the fact that these species are
the outcome of a longer coevolutionary process. In the *Lamellodiscus* group
at least, this is contradicted by the fact that generalist species tend to be
derived, rather than ancestral [@desdevises_evolution_2002]. Given the
importance that is attributed to host acquisition events in separating
ecological and historical effects on the evolution of specificty
[@morand_investigating_2002], and the disagreement between predictions derived
from coevolutionary studies and the phylogenetic distribution of generalism,
it seems that the evolution of larger host ranges is an important point to
clarify the coevolutionary consequences on phylogenetic structures.

Several evidences, however, point to the fact that these events can result in
matching phylogenies. @jackson_cophylogenetic_2004 and @de_vienne_when_2007
observed that, as long as parasite acquire new hosts which are
phylogenetically related to their current ones, the chances that a co-
phylogenetic structure is detected increases. This is especially true if the
parasite evolves faster than the host, in which case the host phylogeny serves
as a "template" that will guide the parasite diversification.

## Coevolution can trigger host diversification

Hosts are selected on their ability to avoid, escape, and resist their parasites. This led to an important literature on the selection for "enemy-free" spaces, *i.e.* environments (or combination of traits) in which the host is freed from the selective and demographic pressure of its enemies [@jeffries_enemy_1984].
 
@bernays_on_1988

@atsatt_lycaenid_1981

@brown_role_1995 observed that when a new host plant emerges, gallmakers tend to select preferentially the ancestral one to lay their eggs. In this perspective, the fact that the new host is not exploited is not a "failure" to cospeciate, but rather reflects the fact that exploiting the new host will result in a loss of performance for the enemy.

The question of diversification through coevolution has been extensively
studied using microbial systems in experimental evolution. @buckling_role_2002
used *Pseudomonas fluorescens* SBW25 and a lytic phage to understand the
consequence of coevolution with parasites on host speciation. The SBW25 strain
has the ability to speciate in three "morphotypes", each specialized on a
narrow set of microhabitats within a test tube [specifically, the interface
with air, the liquid medium in the middle of the tube, and the anoxygenic zone
in the bottom, @rainey_adaptive_1998]. @buckling_role_2002 report that
coevolution *decreased* the frequency of sympatric (*i.e.* within a test tube)
speciations, but *increased* the frequency of allopatric (*i.e.* across test
tubes) speciation. The conclusion of this study is that coevolution can
increase host diversity at a *regional*, but does not consistently does so at
a *local* scale. @brockhurst_effect_2005 further refined this result, using
phages of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* bacterium. When diversification
occured, resistant hosts specialized on different ecological phenotypes,
suggesting that their new combination of traits freed then from the pathogen
pressure.

## Coevolution can trigger parasite extinction

FIND SOME REFS

# Conclusions

The literature reviewed here point to an interesting problem: the relationship
between the coevolutionary process, and the phylogenetic structure of hosts-
parasites associations, is expected to vary with scales. At large taxonomic or
temporal scales (*e.g.* across the species in a genus, or genus in a larger
taxa), non-coevolutionary factors are expected to favor the emergence of a co-
phylogenetic structure. Such is the case in the several systems mentioned, for
which co-speciation events reflected large-scale biogeographic events.
Conversely, and at a finer taxonomic or temporal scale (*e.g.* closely related
species within a genus), the output of the coevolutionary process is expected
to be a deviation from co-divergence, with hosts and parasites phylogenetic
structures looking different. In short, at a "macro" scale, we expect the
phylogenies of hosts and their parasites to look similar, although the cause
of the similarity is not the coevolutionary process. At a "micro" scale
however, there is no reason to expect, except under particularly restricted
scenarios, that the coevolutionary process will result in matching
phylogenies. This calls for more attention to the scale, both temporal,
spatial, and taxonomic, at which the concept of coevolution is applied.

heterogeneity -- papiers lamello yves, moi, kaci-chaouch

However, there is a more pressing, and potentially problematic issue. Assuming that the existence of a co-phylogenetic structure indicates a coevolutionary past can hinder our ability to understand the evolution of host defense mechanisms. Early in the study of coevolution, **janzen** pointed out that current defense mechanisms most likely evolved in response to past enemies. In the field of bacteria-phage interactions, this proposition received some empirical support. CRISPRs, short genomic sequences of bacteria used for defense against contemporary phages, are most likely fragments of the genome of phage exploiting the ancestral bacteria **WEITZ**. The use of CRISPRs in defense was dubbed the *ghost of coevolution past* **VALE**, and illutrates that the contemporary defense mechanisms may not be a response to the contemporary enemies.

assuming that cophylo = coevo can hinder our understanding of how defense evolve: janzen (evolved IN THE PAST), cavender-bares

**FINAL POINT**: need to better integrate the spatial/temporal turnover [@alvarez_phylogeography_2010]

# Figures

![Bibliometric analysis of the cophylogeny-coevolution association. Left: Number of articles published each year (data from Web of Knowledge) with cospeciation, codivergence, or cophylogeny in the text (plain line), and subset of these articles also mentioning coevolution (dashed line). Right: proportion of the papers about cophylogeny, cospeciation or codivergence mentioning coevolution. This ratio has been stable (around 0.34) since the 1990s.](./bibliometry.png)

<!-- 
![Effect of adding interactions in a host-parasite interaction matrix on the results of *ParaFit*. The data used come from **ttt**. Left panel: value of the parafit global statistic (lower value inidicate high support for coevolution). Right panel: p-value of the parafit test. In both panels, the outcome of 100 simulations (mean plus/minus one standard deviation) are ploted. The solid line is the value on the original dataset. In the right panel, the dashed line represents *p = 0.05*.](./parafit-test.png) -->

# References

<!-- # Methodological consequences

In the previous part, I **what?**

This view bears important methodological consequences, as I show that (i) the detection of a co-phylogenetic structure is not a good indicator of wether coevolution occured or not, and (ii) some of these tests may furthermore be biased by some situations which are likely to arise in coevolutionary systems.

There has been a number of methodological developments surrounding the significance of a co-phylogenetic pattern. SHORT REVIEW.

A good number of these methods have strong underlying assumptions, some of which may make little ecological sense. Looking at the method behind *ParaFit* [@legendre_statistical_2002]], it is clear that the emergence of generalist parasites will result in a loss of statistical power. This test works on the assumption that most of the parasitic lineages are highly specialized, which was the dominant opinion in systematic parasitology at some point REF, and may hold true for broad taxonomical scales REF. Should generalists parasites appears at several places in the tree, even after a perfect series of cospeciation, they would prevent the detection of the cospeciation events.

PROBLEM WITH THIS ‚Äì if coevo leads to more generalism, even after cospe, then viewing these as evidences of coevo will tell no coevo !!!

* Assumptions behind tests of cospeciation (Parafit and subsequent methods), and how they relate to the biological reality

Some interesting recent proposals have been made to better integrate evolutionary and ecological mechanisms in the study of host-parasites community phylogenetics, starting with a replacement of the world co-phylogeny by co-phylogeography [@nieberding_use_2010]. This step is extremely important, as it explicitly accounts for the spatial signal in the ‚Ä¶ **more** -->